In this video, you will learn to
describe the three
encryption types used in
modern cryptography
including typical uses and
advantages of each;
symmetric, asymmetric, hash.
On this section we will
discuss three main types
of cryptography or
modern encryption types.
There are the symmetric,
the asymmetric and
the hash functions.
Symmetric Encryption, there
are several cross of it
or strengths both
include the speed,
and the fact that the
cryptographic strength
increases by bit of the key.
So meaning, if we
have a bigger key the
cryptographic will
be more secure.
The up welling with
Symmetric Encryption is that
the key to be shared
using a secure method
sometimes an out-of-band
method meaning we cannot send
a key plaintext to
the third party
using an unsecured channel.
Because as we
discussed previously,
the whole extent of the
encryption algorithm or
the algorithm is based on
just one key and that key needs
to remain secret at all times.
DES, Triple DES and AES are
just some of the examples
that we currently use
and AES is one of
the most modern
symmetric encryption
that we currently
us as up to date.
On the other hand, asymmetric
encryption uses two keys.
Whitfield Diffie and
Martin Hellman are the ones
that created the
Diffie-Hellman algorithm.
They're considered
the pioneers of
the modern asymmetric encryption.
On asymmetric encryption,
we have to keys as
I mentioned before.
One key can be made
publicly called
public key and the other one
needs to be kept
private at all times,
it is called the private key.
Since we have
two keys, one key is
used to encrypt and the other
one is used to decrypt.
So basically whatever
is encrypted with
the public key can
only be decrypted
with the private key and
the other way around as well.
Whatever is encrypted
with the private key
can only really decrypted
with the public key.
Asymmetric encryption is used
in digital certificates,
it's used in public
key infrastructures.
It uses the one-way algorithm
to generate the two keys.
It's based on math like factoring
prime numbers and
discrete logarithm.
This basically used for
generating the two set of keys.
It's actually a lot smaller than
symmetric encryption and
this is a reason why
whenever we use
asymmetric encryption
most of the time we're
using symmetric
encryption as well.
To put it in an example,
whenever you visit
a HTTPS website or
a secure website,
you use an asymmetric
encryption first to exchange
the key for the
symmetric encryption
to be used from
that point forward.
So basically as we
discussed earlier,
since we need to be
able to exchange
the key for the symmetric
encryption in a secure manner,
asymmetric encryption
permits that we exchange
one key between two nodes or
two parties and from
that point forward
we'll be able to use
symmetric encryption
which is a lot
faster in a secure manner.
The hash functions
provide encryption
using a one-way
algorithm and no key.
This means that any length or
a variable-length plaintext is
hashed into a
fixed-length hash value.
This is often called
message digest or simply a hash.
This is used like we talked
before for integrity.
If a message or
a plaintext changes and we
can determine this by hashing
that same plain text and checking
the previous hash and
the hash that we just did.
In other words, if we generated
a plaintext and we send
it to somebody else
with a corresponding hash and
somebody changed that
plaintext in transit,
then we can determine if
something is changing
on that message using
the previews hash generated
and then the hash generated
after the message arrived.
SHA-1 and MD5 are
older algorithms.
They are prone to collisions
and SHA-2 is the newer and
recommended alternative.
Hash functions are prone to
collisions or that's
one of the issues.
SHA-1 and MD5 are
the older algorithms that are
more prone to collisions.
A collision means
two different plaintexts
having the same hash.
Again, since we have
a limited amount
of characters that
the hash actually outputs,
let's say MD5 outputs
15 characters or more,
there is a possibility that
two plaintexts can have
the same exact hash volume
or message digest.
Those are called collisions.